README.md, before:

## Introduction
The client allows to connect to MQTT server and send/receive messages according to MQTT messaging protocol versions 3.1, 3.1.1 and 5.0.
The client is written in Erlang. 
The client was tested with RabbitMQ and Mosquitto server on Windows/Linux/MacOSX boxes.

## Architecture
MQTT client is an OTP application. Top level component is supervisor
that is monitoring a child connection processes. Session state data are storing in database (DETS and MySQL in current version)

## Getting started
### Installation
To start with the client you have to complete three steps below:

1. Install [Mosquitto](https://mosquitto.org/) or [RabbitMQ](https://www.rabbitmq.com/) (with MQTT plugin) server.
2. Install [Erlang](http://www.erlang.org/download.html).
3. Install [Rebar3](https://www.rebar3.org/).


### Building
#### Download or clone from SourceForge GIT repository
Download zip file erl.mqtt.client-vsn-1.0.{x}.zip from project files folder [sourceforge project](https://sourceforge.net/projects/mqtt-client/files/versions-1.0.x/),
unzip it and rename unziped folder to erl.mqtt.client. This is an Eclipse project folder. You do not need to use Eclipse to build the client but 
if you want you can use convenience of Eclipse and Erlide plugin.
Other way to get the client code is GIT. Type command 

```bash
git clone https://git.code.sf.net/p/mqtt-client/code erl.mqtt.client
```
to download from SourceForge GIT repository. For GitHub repository type

```bash
git clone https://github.com/alekras/mqtt_client.git erl.mqtt.client
```
#### Compiling
After you have got source code of the client then change directory to the erl.mqtt.client:

```bash
cd erl.mqtt.client
```
Run rebar3 for this project. You have to add path to rebar3 to OS PATH variable or just use the whole path:

```bash
/opt/local/bin/rebar3 compile
```
Rebar will fetch code of all dependencies and compile source files of main project and all dependencies.

### Testing
Next step is running the examples. Suppose you install Mosquitto MQTT server as 'localhost' that opened 1883 port 
for listening a TCP/IP connections from clients.
You have to setup 'quest' account with 'guest' password.
Start Erlang shell: 

```bash
erl -pa _build/default/lib/*/ebin
```

## Run application
After we start Erlang shell for testing we need to start application 'mqtt_client' that represents describing client.

```erlang
2> application:start(mqtt_client).
ok
```
Load records definitions to console environment to make our next steps more clear:

```erlang
3> rr("include/mqtt_client.hrl").
[connect,connection_state,mqtt_client_error,primary_key,
 publish,storage_publish]
```

## Connection
Assign record #connect{} to Conn_def value:

```erlang
4> Conn_def = #connect{
4> client_id = "publisher", 
4> user_name = "guest",
4> password = <<"guest">>,
4> will = 0,
4> will_message = <<>>,
4> will_topic = "",
4> clean_session = 1,
4> keep_alive = 1000
4> }.
#connect{client_id = "publisher",user_name = "guest",
         password = <<"guest">>,will = 0,will_qos = 0,
         will_retain = 0,will_topic = [],will_message = <<>>,
         clean_session = 1,keep_alive = 1000}
```
And finally create new connection to MQTT server as localhost:1883 (use {127,0,0,1} if "localhost" does not work in your host):

```erlang
5> PubCon = mqtt_client:connect(publisher, Conn_def, "localhost", 1883, []).
<0.77.0>
```
We have connection PubCon to MQTT server now. Let's create one more client's connection with different client Id:

```erlang
6> Conn_def_2 = Conn_def#connect{client_id = "subscriber"}.
#connect{client_id = "subscriber",user_name = "guest",
         password = <<"guest">>,will = 0,will_qos = 0,
         will_retain = 0,will_topic = [],will_message = <<>>,
         clean_session = 1,keep_alive = 1000}
7> SubCon = mqtt_client:connect(subscriber, Conn_def_2, "localhost", 2883, []).
<0.116.0>
```
## TLS/SSL Connection
To establish connection secured by TLS we need to add to socket option list atom 'ssl' like this:

```erlang
7> SubCon = mqtt_client:connect(subscriber, Conn_def_2, "localhost", 2884, [ssl]).
```
Note that we are using there port 2884. This MQTT server port has to be set to listen as SSL socket. How configure Mosquitto server
[see](https://dzone.com/articles/secure-communication-with-tls-and-the-mosquitto-broker/).
If we want to pass additional properties to SSL application on client side we can do it using options list:

```erlang
7> SubCon = mqtt_client:connect(subscriber, Conn_def_2, "localhost", 2884, [ssl, {certfile,"client.crt"}, {verify, verify_none}]).
```
## Subscribe and publish
To finish set up of the connection we need to subscribe it to some topic for example "Test" topic. Before make subscription we
need to define callback function. This function will act as 'application' from MQTT protocol terminology. When client receives message
from server's topic then callback function will be invoked and the message will be passed to it.

```erlang
8> CBF = fun(Arg) -> io:format(user,"callback function: ~p",[Arg]) end.
#Fun<erl_eval.6.52032458>
9> mqtt_client:subscribe(SubCon, [{"Test", 1, CBF}]).
{suback,[1]}
```
Now we can publish message to "Test" topic. After short moment subscriber receives this message and fire callback function:

```erlang
10> mqtt_client:publish(PubCon, #publish{topic = "Test"}, <<"Test Message Payload.">>).
ok
11> callback function: {1,{publish, 0,0,0,<<"Test Message Payload.">>}}
```
Callback function argument is a tuple of five elements. First element is QoS of the topic from that the message came. Second element is a message `#publish{}` record.

```erlang
Arg = {Topic_QoS, Message#publish{}}
```

## References

1. [https://mosquitto.org/] - Mosquitto MQTT server.
2. [https://www.rabbitmq.com/] - RabbitMQ server with MQTT plugin.
3. [https://sourceforge.net/projects/mqtt-server/] - Erlang MQTT server.
4. [http://www.hivemq.com/demos/websocket-client/] - MQTT websocket client.
5. [http://www.mqttfx.org/] - MQTT client.

Commit message:

Add validation of connection config and publish.

README.md, after:

## Introduction
The client allows to connect to MQTT server and send/receive messages according to MQTT messaging protocol versions 3.1, 3.1.1 and 5.0.
The client is written in Erlang. 
The client was tested with RabbitMQ and Mosquitto server on Windows/Linux/MacOSX boxes.

## Architecture
MQTT client is an OTP application. Top level component is supervisor
that is monitoring a child connection processes. Session state data are storing in database (DETS and MySQL in current version)

## Getting started
### Installation
To start with the client you have to complete three steps below:

1. Install [Mosquitto](https://mosquitto.org/) or [RabbitMQ](https://www.rabbitmq.com/) (with MQTT plugin) server.
2. Install [Erlang](http://www.erlang.org/download.html).
3. Install [Rebar3](https://www.rebar3.org/).


### Building
#### Download or clone from SourceForge GIT repository
Download zip file erl.mqtt.client-vsn-1.0.{x}.zip from project files folder [sourceforge project](https://sourceforge.net/projects/mqtt-client/files/versions-1.0.x/),
unzip it and rename unziped folder to erl.mqtt.client. This is an Eclipse project folder. You do not need to use Eclipse to build the client but 
if you want you can use convenience of Eclipse and Erlide plugin.
Other way to get the client code is GIT. Type command 

```bash
git clone https://git.code.sf.net/p/mqtt-client/code erl.mqtt.client
```
to download from SourceForge GIT repository. For GitHub repository type

```bash
git clone https://github.com/alekras/mqtt_client.git erl.mqtt.client
```
#### Compiling
After you have got source code of the client then change directory to the erl.mqtt.client:

```bash
cd erl.mqtt.client
```
Run rebar3 for this project. You have to add path to rebar3 to OS PATH variable or just use the whole path:

```bash
/opt/local/bin/rebar3 compile
```
Rebar will fetch code of all dependencies and compile source files of main project and all dependencies.

### Testing
Next step is running the examples. Suppose you install Mosquitto MQTT server as 'localhost' that opened 1883 port 
for listening a TCP/IP connections from clients.
You have to setup 'quest' account with 'guest' password.
Start Erlang shell: 

```bash
erl -pa _build/default/lib/*/ebin
```

## Run application
After we start Erlang shell for testing we need to start application 'mqtt_client' that represents describing client.

```erlang
2> application:start(mqtt_client).
ok
```
Load records definitions to console environment to make our next steps more clear:

```erlang
3> rr("include/mqtt_client.hrl").
[connect,connection_state,mqtt_client_error,primary_key,
 publish,storage_publish]
```

## Connection
Assign record #connect{} to Conn_def value:

```erlang
4> Conn_def = #connect{
4> client_id = "publisher", 
4> user_name = "guest",
4> password = <<"guest">>,
4> will = 0,
4> will_message = <<>>,
4> will_topic = "",
4> clean_session = 1,
4> keep_alive = 1000
4> }.
#connect{client_id = "publisher",user_name = "guest",
         password = <<"guest">>,will = 0,will_qos = 0,
         will_retain = 0,will_topic = [],will_message = <<>>,
         clean_session = 1,keep_alive = 1000}
```
And finally create new connection to MQTT server as localhost:1883 (use {127,0,0,1} if "localhost" does not work in your host):

```erlang
5> PubCon = mqtt_client:connect(publisher, Conn_def, "localhost", 1883, []).
<0.77.0>
```
We have connection PubCon to MQTT server now. Let's create one more client's connection with different client Id:

```erlang
6> Conn_def_2 = Conn_def#connect{client_id = "subscriber"}.
#connect{client_id = "subscriber",user_name = "guest",
         password = <<"guest">>,will = 0,will_qos = 0,
         will_retain = 0,will_topic = [],will_message = <<>>,
         clean_session = 1,keep_alive = 1000}
7> SubCon = mqtt_client:connect(subscriber, Conn_def_2, "localhost", 2883, []).
<0.116.0>
```
## TLS/SSL Connection
To establish connection secured by TLS we need to add to socket option list atom 'ssl' like this:

```erlang
7> SubCon = mqtt_client:connect(subscriber, Conn_def_2, "localhost", 2884, [ssl]).
```
Note that we are using there port 2884. This MQTT server port has to be set to listen as SSL socket. How configure Mosquitto server
[see](https://dzone.com/articles/secure-communication-with-tls-and-the-mosquitto-broker/).
If we want to pass additional properties to SSL application on client side we can do it using options list:

```erlang
7> SubCon = mqtt_client:connect(subscriber, Conn_def_2, "localhost", 2884, [ssl, {certfile,"client.crt"}, {verify, verify_none}]).
```
## Web socket Connection
The MQTT client can establish web socket connection:

```erlang
1> SubCon = mqtt_client:connect(subscriber, Conn_def_2, "localhost", 8880, [{conn_type, web_socket}]).
```
In this configuration a server has to except web socket connection on 8880 port. Please, read server documentation how configure server in this way. 

## Subscribe and publish
To finish set up of the connection we need to subscribe it to some topic for example "Test" topic. Before make subscription we
need to define callback function. This function will act as 'application' from MQTT protocol terminology. When client receives message
from server's topic then callback function will be invoked and the message will be passed to it.

```erlang
8> CBF = fun(Arg) -> io:format(user,"callback function: ~p",[Arg]) end.
#Fun<erl_eval.6.52032458>
9> mqtt_client:subscribe(SubCon, [{"Test", 1, CBF}]).
{suback,[1]}
```
Now we can publish message to "Test" topic. After short moment subscriber receives this message and fire callback function:

```erlang
10> mqtt_client:publish(PubCon, #publish{topic = "Test"}, <<"Test Message Payload.">>).
ok
11> callback function: {1,{publish, 0,0,0,<<"Test Message Payload.">>}}
```
Callback function argument is a tuple of five elements. First element is QoS of the topic from that the message came. Second element is a message `#publish{}` record.

```erlang
Arg = {Topic_QoS, Message#publish{}}
```

## References

1. [https://mosquitto.org/] - Mosquitto MQTT server.
2. [https://www.rabbitmq.com/] - RabbitMQ server with MQTT plugin.
3. [https://sourceforge.net/projects/mqtt-server/] - Erlang MQTT server.
4. [http://www.hivemq.com/demos/websocket-client/] - MQTT websocket client.
5. [http://www.mqttfx.org/] - MQTT client.
